Charles Dickens' Great Expectations is an excellent literary example in which acharacter's mind is pulled in equally strong, conflicting directions by two compelling desires and ambitions. The main character and protagonist, Philip Pirrip, or Pip, as he is referred to in the text, undergoes a journey into adulthood accompanied by two completely different lifestyles. On one hand, Pip is drawn to the lifestyle he was born into- that of a humble and lower-class blacksmith. On the other, Pip is pulled into the ropes of high society and gentlemanly life by Mrs. Havisham and Magwitch. This system of being caught between two contrasting forces sets the groundwork for his great expectations of which the entire plot of the novel ties in. Pip's old lifestyle fills him with reproach and he is led to believe that he must pursue the gentlemanly life in order to win over Estella, a lady raised by Mrs. Havisham. He is torn, however, when he discovers that Mrs. Havisham was setting him up for disappointment and that the upper class isn't a requirement for happiness. Dickens' establishes this dual-class system for Pip so that he may critique social classes and speak to human nature within Great Expectations.The novel begins by describing Pip's orphaned life with his sister and her husband, Joe, a humble blacksmith. The original plans for his growth were that he would be raised as Joe's apprentice. He works with Joe for six years before he is spontaneously granted money and instructed to be sent to London to become a gentlemen with the funding from an anonymous benefactor. Pip assumes that his benefactress is Mrs. Havisham and she has provided Pip with the expectation that he will develop into a gentleman and be an eligible candidate for Estella; who thought Pip was nothing more than a poor laborer. After living in London and learning the ways of the upper class with the assistance of his benefactor's donations, Pip grow apart from his own life. When Pip is visited by Joe in London, he notes that Joe does not fit into his life. He feels remorse and thinks that he should go back to his old home to show his repentance. Pip talks himself out of the thought, however, in favor of further pursuing the gentlemanly life that he believes was bestowed upon him for the sole purpose of being with Estella. "It was clear that I must repair to our town next day, and in the first flow of my repentance it was equally clear that I must stay at Joe's. But ... I was not by any means convinced on the last point, and began to invent reasons and make excuses for putting up at the Blue Boar" (399). Pip continues chasing his upper class "dream girl" until the truth about his patron is revealed.When the true identity of Pip's benefactor is revealed to be Magwitch, he is concerned about his future with Estella and confronts Mrs. Havisham about it. She confirms that she was leading Pip on the entire time with the false idea that she was his benefactress. After Pip's actual benefactor dies, he becomes very ill. He also loses his connection to the upper class world, now that his source of income is deceased. With no money and no stature, Pip finds himself in the care of Joe and Biddy. They assist him in his recovery and Pip is reminded of his home life that he had been putting off for so long. Joe comforts Pip and informs him that he is there for him, regardless of his decision to pursue life as a gentleman. "Which dear old Pip, old chap ... you and me was ever friends" (827). To this, Pip is extremely thankful, and has all of his faith restored in for his life at home.The conflict that Pip faces between his two lifestyles adds to Great Expectations by allowing Dickens' to comment on the social classes of his time. Pip originally is led to believe that the upper class is absolutely necessary in order to achieve happiness and Estella. He thinks this because he is not aware that his benefactor is actually Magwitch, not Mrs. Havisham. When his "destiny" falls through on itself, the upper class turns out to be no more than Magwitch's gift to Pip, not an essential component for happiness. This point is further proved when Pip becomes ill after Magwitch's passing. Joe and Biddy nurse him back to health and he learns that social status has nothing to do with one's state of being. Pip can conclude, by the end of the novel, that social class does not relate to happiness, and that no matter which lifestyle he chooses, what truly is key to happiness is the way that people treat each other. All of Pip's good fortune can be traced back to him performing a good deed for Magwitch, who decided to return the favor. "Look'ee here, Pip. I'm your second father. You're my son - more to me nor any son. I've put away money, only for you to spend" (569). By weaving this criticism of social structure into his novel, Dickens' is able to deliver a powerful message regarding the classes to the reader, as he is typically known for in his works.The concept of having two different sets of ambitions bestowed upon a character in order to speak further to the meaning of the text is an excellent method of delivering a message to the reader. In Great Expectations, Dickens uses Pip's conflicting lifestyle choices to make comments on society and demonstrate that one's ranking in society is not responsible for their happiness. Pip is taught this the hard way by being misled about how important being a gentleman is compared to a humble home life with Joe. In the end, it is revealed to Pip that true happiness and friendship can come from anywhere- he was shown good fortune by a convict in exchange for a good deed that he had done long in the past. These feelings of friendship transcended Pip's social stature and remained with him whether he was training to become a blacksmith's apprentice or living in London learning to become a gentleman. Although not necessarily the main message behind Dickens' novel, the opposing dual forces act to illuminate the piece as a whole, embedding it with deep rooted philosophies of human nature and social standing.
