In any novelistic work of literature, the author takes the responsibility of controlling how the reader will perceive the characters in their story. The author defines both the characters' actual personalities and what their personalities appear to be. In a number of cases the author will leisurely leave the perception aspect untouched and focus only on a character's traits. This allows the reader to freely decide for themselves how they choose to feel about a certain character. In Peter Carey's novel, Jack Maggs, however, Carey actively works to take advantage of this duality to present an otherwise traditionally negative and dark character in a more positive and favorable light. This is accomplished mostly through the use of character descriptions, magnetism sessions, and letters to Henry; these forces combined invoke feelings of pity and sympathy towards Jack Maggs. Whether or not Maggs' is actually a victim of circumstance like we are led to believe or simply a devious criminal mastermind is left up to the reader to decide.The character descriptions in Jack Maggs are all told from the viewpoint of another character. Carey even goes as far as describing characters twice in two separate chapters in order to cover multiple perspectives. Chapters that describe Maggs from his point of view are worded carefully to make him appear as a more innocent character, although people still react to him as if he is hostile. "His eyes were dark, inquiring, and yet there was a bruised, even belligerent quality which had kept his fellow passengers at their distance all through that long journey ..." (4). Chapters that describe him from other characters' point of view, such as Lizzie, also present him in a violent manner. "As he held up his hands, Lizzie felt a chill of fear ... they seemed very delicate instruments with which to master such a beast" (91). From these descriptions the reader gathers a sense of pity for Maggs. He appears to be somewhat humble in his actions when described by himself, and then other people judge him and treat him like an animal of some sort through their perceptions of him.Another method in which the the reader can feel more sympathetic towards Jack Maggs is through Tobias' magnetism sessions. Instead of being introduced as a form of interrogation to a criminal, it is viewed as the process of robbing Jack Maggs of his secrets. "He was burgled, plundered, and he would not tolerate it" (36). As the end of the book draws near, Jack seeks comfort in the fact that Tobias promises to present Jack lightly and not mention Sophina. When it is later discovered that Tobias lied and betrayed Jack, rather than viewing the scene of Jack threatening Tobias as a horrific event, the reader will find him/herself almost agreeing with and supporting Jack's motives and emotions. "You have cheated me, Toby, as bad as I was ever cheated" (306). This chapter, if read alone, would give the reader the impression that Jack really is the hard-boiled tough guy he is in the eyes of the other characters. However, when bundled with the situation that Jack is in from the mesmerism sessions, the act is excusable.As the story progresses, Jack Maggs writes a series of letters to his ‘son' Henry. Through these letters, Maggs reveals pieces of his past that truly work to tie together all of the reader's feelings of sympathy for him. After being abandoned as a child, Jack was raised with the life of a thief. Mary Britten lays this out when she tells Tom that he is to live a normal life and Jack the life of a criminal. "You are the man, said she. You are the man that gets the meat" (117). When Maggs recounts the time that he slides into someone's chimney to steal, it is a traumatizing experience. He is hit, crying, uncomfortable, and knocked unconscious by Silas. "... I had done as well as I could, and that I had nearly died inside the chimney" (110). His innocence is proven as a child and the reader's pity for him as a child transfers over into his adult life as well.Although Jack Maggs' actions throughout the story are not those that would imply he is kind-hearted or a victim of fate, Peter Carey very nearly creates the illusion of such. This is accomplished by gradually and slowly loading the story with opposing viewpoints of innocence and violence, the pressure of Tobias' novel and mesmerism work, and Maggs' own accounts of his troubled history. Through these manners, Carey is able to take advantage of specifying both a character's actual personality and that character's perception to the reader to produce a more sympathetic view of Jack Maggs despite his terrible deeds and evil nature.
